today I'll be talking about until TB
that is an open-source database that we
are building
so before starts just to give you a
quick presentation of where we are
coming so we are at North University of
Lisbon that is in the other side of the
river so we are more or less year so we
are located in the other side of the
river University is a quite big
University with several schools medical
school Science and Technology law the
typical schools that you could think
about in a university with more than
28,000 students the Science and
Technology school weighs about 9,000
students and in our research centre the
computing system Krister / centre we are
about 20 faculty plus postdocs and we
have about 20 PhD students and lots of
master students always working with us
so the research centre is is divided in
four areas software systems multimodal
systems computer systems and
knowledge-based systems so we work in at
the computer cyst computer system so the
research entities is a broad research
centre they're seeing more or less most
of the topics of computer system so
today I will be talking a little bit of
antidote and also other CRD related
projects at novel links just to give you
points that if you want to talk with me
after that so in the afternoon I will be
around so so we will know that joke
application is here to stay and then
there is a trade-off between consistency
and availability and if you look at the
record storage that has been that has
been created if we see at the first wave
of cloud storage sink like Cassandra and
react basically these data storage were
eventually consistent data stores okay
where he basically evenly have guarantee
is that that will converge in Cassandra
things would converge by what writer
wins
react improved on that the the
they have see oddities with little
matter semantics but still everything
was eventful consistence so if you look
at the second wave of cloud storage
things like cosmos DB spanner Google
spanner so it seems we moved completely
to the other side of the spectrum and
everyone wants to have strong
consistency and very very very very
strong guarantees on on on on your data
but providing these if even on spanner
that can have good support still the
latency is still I and if there is if
there is problems if there is some
network partitions you still may may get
blocked so what isn't it ought to be but
basically until OTV is kind of our
answer to this kind of two-way spectrum
in what we are trying to answer is is it
possible to be I believe I'll be
available and still provide strong
semantics and what do we mean by strong
semantics so that's what I I will tie to
to explain to you so what are the
strands man takes that we want so let's
think about F F F a banking application
so I had this slide already then so I
have not adapted but you can think of
the examples that were given here before
so the first thing that we want in
general in applications is that we want
all replicas to converge and of course
for these we have the problem of
concurrent updates you all know about
deals you can is acute to operations
concurrently you you then F to decide
what happens and for solving these
basically we are doing what everyone is
doing is we are using C R DT so now
nothing especially here so let's let's
look at things a little bit more complex
so in a bank in a banking application if
you only have transfers we
basically you want that the balance will
be equal to the initial balance plus the
deposits - the withdrawals okay so let's
let's look at what happens so suppose we
have two accounts and I account starts
with five in a B accounts are sweet one
okay and and we start to see what is the
balance f i+ b the balance fi plus B is
okay we have five in one account when in
and out an account so we have six so
well now suppose we we want to transfer
three from A to B okay
now comes what gets a little bit more
complex so if we have everything here in
in DC and we can do acute operations
immediately I will be with two and B
will be wait for okay because we are
transferring three from A to B so the
problem comes now because typically in
these systems typically in these systems
I will have to execute two operations
when to update objects a by decrementing
three and another two to apply to object
B for incrementing three so so what
happens now if this operation arrives
here and I applied a I know is to this B
is still 1 and and what happens is is
that if now I try to see the balance
between I in the I please be I get three
and I shouldn't get three because I'm
doing a transfer okay so the balance
should be still when I my some APIs be
issue they have still six but I don't I
have only three I have this because I
have been executing the operation in the
middle of two operations and this is a
problem that happens in many
applications many applications you want
to issue to an operation that is to be
divided in two operations and you don't
want the state in the middle to be
visible so
what is the solution that we have
implemented for these basically our
approach for these is to to use
something that we call I live our
transactions okay there there are other
other systems that do this and there are
several protocols for doing this but our
data buys F what is called a liveable
transactions what our value of our
transactions
basically there are transactions okay
where when you read you read from a
consistent snapshot when you take it as
a set of operations all those operations
are visible atomically or they are not
visible for example here when you see
these updates in this replica these are
plates we one will be visible after the
second one is executed and not before
and these guarantees us that we see
always a consistent state okay and this
can be done can be done in a weekly
consistent way so we don't have to
coordinate between between between data
centers to do this okay so this is the
the first additional strong guarantee
that we are giving I will go with
transactions the same the second one is
okay so sometimes it seems that things
disappear in the middle so let me give
you an example so getting back to this
example so after a third three to a and
B okay and I said okay and I'll suppose
that the client C seen that the transfer
has been done and decided to write in
some other object okay and I'm having
here a log but could be something more
complex I'd the transfer has been done
and this object is now replicated okay
and in these weekly available systems
typically objects are synchronized per
object they there is no global
synchronization each object synchronous
itself so this logo object can be
synchronized before these ones are
synchronized and now if a client comes
and reads the work in
what what will we be see basically
seeing that the lock size the
transferees then but the values are
still the initial values okay so how can
we solve this basically we can solve
this by enforcing causal consistency and
again cosmic resistance can be enforce
it without without coordination between
data centers okay and this gives also
another set of guarantees to the
applications okay so finally so the
symbol sometimes seems that is the most
complex that is so I have the account
balance this banking application and
then I don't want this account to be
non-negative
okay so let's suppose that we start with
an account at five okay and if if the
first client with all three in this
replica it seems everything is okay
because I is still 2 but if concurrently
another replica with rust for example 4
okay in this replica it seems everything
is fine because the value of I is still
1 right so everything seems to be ok the
problem comes when you you you
synchronize when you synchronize
basically you'll see that the value
would be minus 2 okay because when you
propagate the updates you combine the
two updates and you end up with minus 2
so this seems this seems a situation
where okay in these cases you really
have to coordinate right until now we
are giving more more guarantees but you
are not coordinating but in this case
you you you need to coordinate yes we
need to coordinate but we can move the
coordination outside of the execution
path in many cases okay how can we do
this but basically we can do this by so
suppose we have five
okay and we pick this five and we split
this five between these two replicas and
we say that this first replicas three in
this second replicas - okay and these
three this replicant can use these three
without coordinating with the other
replicas this one can use these two
replicas so if now is acute I know an
operation the quiet one to get to know
operation Twittersphere that's fine
I have three year that I can use okay so
I can determine I can say okay without
kulhanek without the replicas what
happens if the other if when the other
were forget tries to draw four okay I
came here I see that that I only have
two and in this moment I have two to
coordinate with other replicas I could
be night I see that I cannot there is no
more available and I will file what what
is what is key here is that so this
example we are very close to the limit
but if you think in an example where you
start it for example 1000 okay and we
divide this 500 in each one you can use
script lots of operations without having
to coordinate you only have to
coordinate really we and when you are
very close to the to the limits okay
so we we have published something that
we call bonnet counters here DT that
addresses this problem okay so and if
you look at more or less kept the
promise that we get when you use this
bonded counter okay most of the
operations are very quick
sometimes you have to coordinate and
then your time will be high okay so and
we can also do other inference I will
not go into details in the other events
but but I can talk with you guys after
if you want so basically we are building
this antidote TB database that is open
source that is at get up it's a joke
replicated not see cool data wise that
is that is this a wave of transactions
theory it is for conversions casual
consistency bonded total for enforcing
numeric invariants and we are building
an a sequel a sequel interface that
enforces sequel it invariant
automatically on the database they we
have preliminary version also at github
for those that want to to to try okay so
before I finish I will just give you a
quick overview father reality related
projects that are that we are running at
empanada links so one of them is
something that we are calling
non-uniform CID T's or non Infinix
application so basically in in this work
we are trying to to answer this
questions so when you think about
replication it seems that all replicas
will have to have the same state if even
if the internal presentation is
different the overall state seems to be
the seems to be always the same but is
this necessary and the answer is no
think for example of about a leader
world if you are to maintain a leader
board and you only to show the 10 first
positions why why do you need to wear
the all list in all replicas you don't
okay so this is something that we are
building we have also versions of see
oddities for for these these kind of
things at at github there is a piper
that you can can read it the second
thing that we are working on is this
privacy perversity preserving see
oddities so the answer the question that
we are trying to answer here is so
suppose it you do not you do not trust
you want you want to to to keep the data
okay private even if they if you distort
the in the server's okay can can we
build shared it is that we can is acute
operations they can merge they can they
can is acute new operations but all data
is is is kept ciphered and basically we
are building these permissive preserving
realities we are using to two basic
approach when using cryptographic
functions for some C additives we need a
mom or fiction's for others we don't
need we we can use things that are much
much lighter and we are using testing
description environment CSS in interest
issues they are basically two two lines
of approaches for addressing this so the
next projected to we are working is so
everything ER duties with multiple
semantics okay so what is the problem so
if you all know about shared it is when
you ever set you can when you build an
application you can have an Edwin
theater where he move in set but
sometimes in some applications
I wanted this operation to be advanced
in this operation to be removing and
there is no way of doing this and so we
are kind of addressing this we have we
have design it see additives for sets
that have both both Edwin's and remove
means okay and we are trying to the
design see oddities that are generic so
that the programmer can specify what is
the policy with its operations okay when
is submit suppression in size I want my
operation to be advanced and this one is
remove ins so they it's a bit more
complex step then it's a it's a bit
trickier but but this is the key idea so
next so and these these
in part is something that we have not
done but as you you guys it's it on
these I've I've added a slide on this
that is the problem of access control
and we consistency this is this party
has been work is work that has been done
by a net BN user and Matthias Weber and
basically they have been trying to
address the problem of every access
control when you have event of
consistency systems so what is the
problem so the problem is that there are
basically there are two problems the
first problem is that you can modify the
access control rules concurrently so you
have to merge those access control rules
so for this we they have this I need
acidity that maintains access control
rules and merges the access control
rules the second problem is then the
interaction between the access control
rules and depressions that are execute
in the in the objects because you might
be securing an operation to revoke the
access to an object and concurrently
someone is accessing that object so
basically they they have this they have
designed it a protocol to address this
this one was implemented on antidote so
they have the transactions and all those
things that would they up a lot okay we
are basically currently working also on
this problem but and on the problem of
in lesion
what is lesion so basically lesion is a
JavaScript framework for building
extended web applications okay that that
is a library of crd something that we
call Delta CR disease but it's not
they're more more or less is a close to
Delta C and it is but there was a small
the small difference and you you you
guys can can access to lesion so we have
a web page where we have where you have
a demo ok so these these these
clients have years here duties I think
it's just it's visible like it so the
the clients in the web browsers connect
via web RTC
and basically you can execute concurrent
operations and merge and we have here
this demo and let me get back to my
presentation so this this is a this is a
we have a library of this year DTC in
JavaScript so this might be interesting
for for Peru and something that will
through mainly that is about two
versions of see oddities and how can you
know where's then what so we worked a
little bit on that so I've just added
this just before the the presentation as
I was seeing the Pettis presentation so
for example swift cloud in swift cloud
we have see oddities where you can
basically go in into the sea LEDs and
ask for a given version of the CR DT or
check all the pressures that were given
by some some client and so we have we
have worked a little bit on that so and
it is I finish my presentation don't
know if there is any questions if not I
will be yes
privacy-preserving charities yes now we
we don't have any we don't have any work
published we have so we are writing a
paper for these Portuguese conference
that is a kind of first take on what is
our status but I will be happy to talk
about so for example so so basically the
question is whether we need foo a
morphic encryption or if we can use
something that is lighter than for
morphic and this is for for some data
types we can use you might not use
fully-armed amorphic for example for
sets if you want where can instead of
having the term is except you you are
good with a probabilistic set with a
very low probability for example you can
use a bloom filter for for recording the
almonds in the depths that's that's
that's enough for example for assets
okay for for others for others it's
together okay I guess so in the this is
working okay so in the causal link
structure it's great it reminded me of
like the the cap the causal chains in
transports done a long time ago which it
was a great line of research I'm curious
as to what happens when when some of
these a lot of the COTC settings are a
few replicas than clients we're
evaluating settings where we have like
millions of replicas because we want
like client oriented things
and those causal chains get really messy
so curious if you've evaluated those
council settings or most of the settings
kind of you know low bounded replicas
numbers so we we do not bound on the
number of clients we can have as many
clients as you want but you know in our
approach we assume that there is a
server and network with causal cause
basically we have two works on this one
that I presented we assume that there is
a backbone and all the kinds
synchronized through the through the
background
okay the background is as multiple
replicas multiple servers but there is a
still a backbone with a limited number
of clients of replicas but the number of
clients can be as as many as you want so
we are we are we have other work where
we we assume that the number that the
clients can synchronize directly and for
those basically we build trees for
keeping causality I can I can talk more
on details about that with you
[Applause]